---
title: Curiosity
---


# About

Curiosity is an ever-evolving prototype system to think, discuss, and
communicate development practices and system design. It is exposed to end-users
as a web application and a running instance of Curiosity is made available at
[`cty-2.hypered.systems`](//cty-2.hypered.systems) for demonstration purpose.
For tech savvy users, the complete system is packaged as a [virtual machine
image](/documentation/machine), made to be easily run and explored.

## Documented

To achieve our goals in making Curiosity a central place to inform future
developments, the complete documentation is part of the virtual machine image.
The documentation is comprised of HTML pages, visible at
[`cty-2.hypered.systems`](//cty-2.hypered.systems/documentation), and [man
pages](/documentation/man-pages), available from the terminal within the
virtual machine.

The documentation part of the Curiosity project is its main goal. The running
prototype is written and used to help us make the documentation accurate and
live; i.e. the documentation reflects the code without reformulating manually
its behavior, but actually runs it or directly queries it.

In particular, business features are demonstrated through [executable
scenarios](/documentation/scenarios).

It is possible to seach this documentation on the [search
page](/documentation/search).

## Experimental

Curiosity is being developed to inform further developments, and is not
intended to be a production system.

## Open source

Curiosity is an open source project distributed under a 2-clause BSD license.
It is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/hypered/curiosity).

## cty-1

During the period August 2022 - January 2023, Curiosity was evolved for the
belgian cooperative Smart Coop. The version as of January is kept alive and
exposed at [`cty-1.hypered.systems`](//cty-1.hypered.systems).

## Why

Another document, titled [Why](/documentation/why), tries to explain where the
Curiosity project came from, and where it was going.
